Hey what's up everyone my name is Keith Gally and in this video we're going to see how we can
build, share, and deploy a Shiny for Python application within 20 minutes.
So if you're not familiar with Shiny for Python it is a framework that allows us to build web
applications in Python that are just very easy to spin up, they're efficient, and they really allow
us to build everything from the simplest dashboard to full-fledged complex web apps. To get started
I recommend checking out the link in the description which will bring you to this
home page that you see here. One thing that I think is worth just mentioning real quick is that
there's this gallery that has all sorts of different projects that you can build in Shiny.
A common project you might want to build is a dashboard so here we see a restaurant tipping
dashboard. It's interactive, I can toggle these different things, I can uncheck dinner, and we can
see how everything changes. We can also build even more complex things such as this super zip explorer
that looks at all the zip codes in the United States and it kind of ranks them and evaluates
them on these different criteria that you see over here on the right side. So if I zoom in the area
kind of updates and we can see that like if I wanted to let's say zoom in on this area of
Philadelphia I can see these different zip codes and then I can even go into this data explorer
and kind of evaluate them a little bit more I guess concretely. In this video series we're going to
specifically be working on building a dashboard that looks kind of like this. It's going to be on
sales data but we'll focus on something very simple for this first video just to get started.
On this same home page there's another area you can go to which is playground where we can start
seeing code samples and actually really getting started super quickly. So go to the playground
again links are in the description and the first thing we see is just like a toggle bar
here that is using Shiny. As we see as we update this toggle we see that it is doing n times two
so 52 104. It's interactive, cool. You probably want to do something a little bit more complex
than that so next we can look at like apps with plots same type of you know scroll bar or what do
you call this toggle bar input slider I guess we'll use the actual name and we can see that the
graph updates and as you go down you can get into very complex things like even building a wordle
app via Shiny. Really cool stuff I recommend exploring these different apps that you can use
you can use Plotly, Altair, any of your favorite Python graphing libraries
but we'll start with this app with a plot. This is cool but it's just random data so
kind of a starting point that I recommend is using this playground and actually building
something that might be meaningful to you. Also linked in the description is a GitHub repo
and in that repo we can access some just simple CSV data so this is students and it's some test
scores on a random exam so one way that I might spin up a Shiny app really quickly
is I might take this data so I'll call this testscores.csv I'll paste it in and you can
you know add files right here in this little playground area I'll save that and then I can
actually reference that data by doing something like df equals let's do a couple things we're
going to want to import pandas probably import pandas as pd we'll probably want to be able to
access this easier using the pathlib so pathlib import path and I can access this file by doing
file path equals path file so this is the file we're currently editing dot parent so
it's the parent directory and then I can simply do testscores.csv and then I can load this file
in with pandas by doing pd.read.csv file path and then instead of this histogram here we can very
easily have our data be set to test scores equals df and then if we looked at that column was score
df score maybe we do even dot values pass in the test scores and we're going to just rerun this
application oh sorry kind of a special syntax here testscores.csv and we can see that this is a
the data from our test scores and we can toggle the number of bins in our histogram very easily
you can see it kind of is a normalish distribution around I would say 80 probably get a little bit
more granularity there with some people performing really well and then as we zoom out some people
performing very much not as well one really cool thing we can do here with Shiny is we can share
this actual editor here in this application so I'm going to share the application url I'll open up a
new tab paste that in and in this url actually everything that we have saved is already encoded
so you can just share this link that's the easiest way to share a Shiny application quickly you could
also have share the actual editor url one one caveat here is I would just be careful to share
anything that's like sensitive data there was no actual names or anything involved in this test
scores data frame so I'm fine sharing it it'd probably be fine for a teacher to share it as
long as it's been anonymized but just kind of things to think about when you're sharing
a link that has all your kind of code right there in the url cool that's a great starting point
next let's build something a little bit more I guess robust and or work our way up to something
more robust github link is in the description we're going to take this repo we're going to clone it
locally so go ahead and open up a terminal window I'm going to go into my code directory
and we can get this code locally by doing something like git clone and then pasting in that link I
already have this locally so I'm going to skip this step but we then would have a shiny python
projects file here and my next step recommendation is to create a virtual python environment to get
all the dependencies you need to run shiny locally so to do that I'm going to do
I'm going to run this command which will create a virtual environment called shiny
in my ends folder and then I can activate that by doing source ends shiny bin activate if you
don't understand what I'm doing here with this virtual environment don't worry too too much about
it a lot of these steps will work without necessarily doing this it's just good practice
to have a virtual environment like this and then finally in this repo there is a requirements.txt
file so to get all of the python dependencies we're going to want to do a pip3 or pip depending
on what version you have install dash r requirements.txt and that should install
everything in our virtual environment if you're curious what was in that requirements.txt it's
just the python libraries that we'll need for these tutorials in this series you can add more
as you see fit the important ones really are shiny and shiny widgets I would say those are
the most important and maybe actually any widget as well cool we have that next use your code editor
of choice I personally like to use visual studio code so I'm going to go ahead and open up visual
studio code and open up this repo within my visual studio code so open it's in code shiny python
projects go ahead and open that and we're going to go into this sales folder I'm going to create
a new file there and we'll call it app.py okay if you're using visual studio code there's a couple
things I recommend if you do command shift p if you're on a mac you can select your interpreter
and you can select that shiny virtual environment we just set up and also the best way to run shiny
apps locally with visual studio code is to go ahead and go to the extensions and look up shiny
go ahead and install this finally we can go back to our app and really a good starting point is
just to go ahead and copy that code that we saw in the shiny examples maybe we'll do something a
little bit different maybe let's do like a plotly plot here we have some plotly graphs
I'm going to go ahead and copy this code I'm going to paste it into my app and a great check is does
this work we should be able to run this right away and it should work so we can click the once you
have the extension installed you can click this button here and we see that the application does
work cool and this fillable option lets it kind of extend to fill the screen if you're not using
visual studio code there's other ways to run this you can go ahead and do the following
from your command line so we are in the sales folder and we can run something like shiny run
dash just reload launch browser our app is we're in the app directory so we can just do app.py
and we can go ahead and run this I got this command from the shiny docs which are also
linked in the description and as you can see it popped up on my other monitor but we have
our little interactive plotly graph here running but let's make this a little bit more custom to
us let's add some you know extra features whatnot so let's look at the docs and we're using shiny
express specifically so shiny express python
I recommend going to components we can see all these different things we can use
you also might want to check out like layouts a lot of interesting things here
and templates also have a lot of cool stuff that you can do and kind of get off the ground running
with and if you click on these I'll show you exactly how to do it but we'll specifically
look at our reference we can start by actually filling in a title that's more applicable so we
can say sales dashboard video one of five save that another thing we'll probably want to do is
edit our tab here what shows up if you launch this in the browser so we might have that be the
same thing I recommend going to the documentation to you know see this type of stuff so looking at
the documentation for the page ops that we're playing with we see that the title here and we
also by doing that it defaults the window title which is this little tab thing we're seeing here
to whatever the title is so I'm happy with that within our app let's maybe add you know let's
make this custom to our data so a good starting point with our data is we can go to the examples
we can see someone read a csv let's just copy this you can look at this code as you see fit
but we're going to paste this in now we have our data frame and we need to import some libraries
and make some fixes so import pandas as pd we're going to need to import reactive specifically so
maybe we just copy in what imports they had there too and then let's just clean this up so delete this
add this move this to the top doesn't really matter where this is positioned
and this is duplicate right I guess we might want to have render
cool
and let's make a custom graph that's specific to our sales data so this should be data
sales csv this would be pd.read csv and finally we can make something a little bit different here
so how would we do df equals the data
our sales data and we'll set this to df we don't want a histogram let's do a bar chart
x will be the look at our sales data product
and the y data will be the number sold so we'll probably have to do some processing on this
we'll do df dot group by product dot count
see this again
a good starting point is to render a data frame
so
see what's in our data frame
and maybe we just group by the product and we aggregate the quantity ordered
so we get let's make a graph of the most popular products
so group by product get the quantity ordered and we're going to get
could do the count we could also do n largest just take five let's say that'll be our new
top sales we'll call this and then finally this will be top sales product
and we might have to reset the index
y will be quantity
ordered and let's see what this gives us comment out this data frame for now
notice i missed something small here i actually wanted to sum
the quantity ordered and then take the five largest this should update my chart
that's what i'm expecting cool and then i think as a last thing that we might want to just see
real quick i could very easily add some sort of input slider or input numeric how about let's do
how about let's do call this n label it number of items we'll give it a default value of five
but we'll say the range can be from 1 to 20 and one thing that's cool that you can do with shiny
is that i can immediately we'll see that this should pop up
i'll do min equals zero max equals 20 we can increase this number and then finally one thing
that's cool is that we could replace this five with the value and we grab the value by doing
input that we input it here and then this is the variable name so in this case it's n so input dot n
will then allow us to showcase
a specific number of items in our chart and as we can see
as i increase this we see more and more items
cool so that's a basic app that was built using shiny for python so now next step finally is how
could we deploy this to have a link that anyone could access quick side note the best way to deploy
will depend on your shiny app and who you want to share it with for example if data security
and authentication are top of mind for you or you work in a larger organization you might want to
consider some of the professional posit options such as posit connect that can be found under
self-hosted deployments alternatively if you're just getting started and building a small public
shiny app shiny live or shiny apps.io are great options you can find all the information under
the deploy button here on the home page for now we're going to go to shiny apps.io and deploy
there you'll want to log in create an account if you don't have one sign up with google quick
so i'm creating an account on shiny apps.io
maybe we'll call this like keith shiny i already have an account so this is kind of just to show
you the process you'll follow follow these steps so you want to set up rs connect on your account
so you want to set up rs connect on your account and we probably want to start with python
install this that should be included in the pip the requirements.txt you want to add this once
you've done that and then you can deploy using this command again i already have an account that's
separate from this one so i'll be using that for the purpose of this i just want to show you those
steps so we can go ahead we're in our sales folder we have our app.py i'm going to paste in
that command we just saw it will know to find the app so i'm going to just do dot slash because
we're already in that folder the name it's actually my account is keith galley and then
we give this a title the title we'll say is
sales video one if i run this command
we see that it is building installing files we also see that we got this warning about the
requirements.txt file not being in that repo so it actually might be the best play to have
this requirements.txt and actually put it directly in the sales folder and just have
a requirements.txt in each of the projects that we're building minute detail but installing files
installing files basically the requirements.txt lets us deploy this and lets shiny know what our
requirements are when we deploy this to the cloud and if we go to that shiny apps
shiny apps.io
to our account we'll see that this new application that we just built is being deployed oh no
i think it got annoyed because of not having the requirements.txt so i'm going to try this
one more time you're allowed five free applications
and then you can upgrade your account to always access more applications so let's try that command
so let's try that command again
and we now have our requirements.txt in that repo and we can see that it's now deploying
it's gone through the necessary installation steps and it is deploying our instance and look
at that we now have our sales dashboard right here online you can share this link you can edit this
ready to go so hey we built this application we shared it both with the url using that student
test score data and then we also saw how we can actually deploy this to a web url with our more
sophisticated sales dashboard start in the next videos in the series we will build off of this
we will really drill into this reactive components and what we can do with these reactive components
we'll see how we can stylize our dashboards to make them way more interesting and way more pretty
and we'll work on some other features seeing how we can combine many different types of plots
many different types of visuals to make this a really impressive looking application hope you
enjoyed this video if you did make sure to throw this video a thumbs up subscribe if you haven't
the next video in this series will be up in the next two weeks